Contents
    Current System Status
    Minimum Useful Mutator

<h1>Current System Status

    22/07/2025

    The current project appears to get as far as simple arrangements
    like subtractFirstParam, and multiply and modulo with the use of
    of templates. Although it is conceivable that the system might
    progress further with the right combination of rules and the
    process of learning from seed rules, it may well be worth considering
    variants of the approach to establish the general validity of the
    evolutionary code approach to machine learning.

    As the system stands it is the system as whole which "learns" by
    the accumulation of solutions and solution fragments that may be useful 
    in solving other problems. The learning at the entity program level
    is all by selective scoring, and sometimes this may fail because
    stepwise solutions to the problem are not available, or because the
    intermediate scores move the system further from the solution 
    probabilistically.

    The decision to be made at this juncture is whether to keep
    refining the existing model, or to extend the theory with the aim
    of writing a new model, or substantially reworking the existing
    model.

    Before moving on to reworking, let us consider whether the existing
    limitations can be overcome.

    Existing Limitations 

        Stepwise Score Traps 
            These may be caused by coincidental matching of values
            in the output that deflect away from the algorithm.

            This problem can be partially overcome by scoring
            required instructions in the program code range.
            However, this leans toward foreknowledge.

            Could statistical code position analysers guide 
            mutations/manipulations?

<h1>Minimum Useful Mutator
    This section considers ideas for a minimum mutable system that
    is still able to produce "useful" results.

    Firstly, let us recap what we are trying to achieve:
        To find a system capable of producing algorithms that
        have meaning, basically in the field of maths.

    Suppose we set ourselves the task of producing modules
    that have a permuted probability of < 1/2,000,000
    with raw probability this would be 6 items of 8 possibilities.
    What could usefully be constructed from such an arrangement?
    
